---
title: Allan Wang (S) - Op/Ed
description: None
updated: 2026-02-19T04:47:16.586Z
lastModifyingUser: Allan
---

**Is Chat GPT the future or the end of the world?**

	ChatGPT  is used by over 800 million people as of February 2026\. This makes it the most used AI tool in the world. Specifically, ChatGPT is an AI chatbot; a computer program you can have conversations with by typing messages. It answers questions, generates media, explains topics, translates languages, and so much more. Unlike Google, ChatGPT doesn’t just search the internet, but generates responses from learned knowledge. But how does it even work?

	For an AI chatbot to work, before you even use it, it has to be trained. Open AI trained ChatGPT with massive amounts of information and text by reading the internet, learning the patterns such as grammar, facts, and reasoning, then finally it gets fine tuned by humans.  This teaches the AI what a helpful response is.  When you actually message the tool first it tokenizes the text, turning it into pieces called tokens. You can imagine this like breaking a sentence into blocks. Then the tokens get converted into vectors, which are numbers in a mathematical space. Then the input gets sent through the AI’s neural network, with different layers for different patterns including grammar, sentence structure, reasoning, and concepts. The fourth step is the attention mechanism. This decides the most important words to process the prompt faster. The last step is to generate the actual response one word at a time. The AI predicts the most likely next word, building the response token by token.

	ChatGPT doesn’t actually think on its own. It is just a large scale pattern matcher. It uses statistics to predict the most likely responses, combining learning patterns in novel ways. It doesn’t actually understand anything, have consciousness or feelings, access information in real time, or remember precious conversations. It is like a sophisticated autocomplete that reads everything. You can think of it like a master chef who has tasted, but never eaten, every single dish in the world. It has trained to be a master chef, can cook and generate delicious recipes, but doesn’t actually know what their food tastes like.

	In the future, ChatGPT can cause many problems; some of which we are already seeing. It can often make mistakes. This can be because it has outdated information, a bias reflected from the training data, doesn’t truly understand information or sometimes it simply makes stuff up. These all feed users false information.  It also is used to create “deepfakes” which are fake videos of people saying or doing something they never actually did.  It can make fake texts  such as fake news articles or reviews and comments. This spreads misinformation and puts people’s privacy in danger. Recently a deepfake of the Ukrainian president surfaced of him surrendering to Russia.   ChatGPT and other chatbot’s second downside is they can displace jobs and disrupt the economy. Many jobs such as customer service, writing/content creation, coding tasks, and manufacturing  are being replaced by AI chatbots. Millions of people could lose their jobs without new opportunities, and the wealth gets concentrated to the owners of companies. For example, IBM replaced over 7,800 jobs with new AI tools. AI tools in general cause many detrimental environmental effects. Training GPT-3 used as much electricity as 120 US homes use in a year. They also use an astonishing amount of water, with large facilities using 1 to 5 million gallons of water every single day\! In the future, our planet may not be able to handle the negative side effects of AI.

	Other problems caused by AI include dependence & loss of skills, security  risks,  lack of laws controlling it, and dehumanization. But many people ignore all of these downsides and use it carelessly for everyday tasks. They argue that it makes life easier, increasing productivity and accelerates creativity. Even though AI reuses previous ideas, uses way more resources than search engines such as google, and is still in early development meaning not many laws have been implemented, protecting artists and media creators from having their work stolen.

	ChatGPT and other AI chatbots are helpful tools still in their infantry. As a result, they still have many problems. In the next couple of years, hopefully these companies will continue to improve AI by reducing their problems. But what can you do to help reduce some of the problems? People can reduce their use of ChatGPT and other AI tools to a minimum if not at all. They can also push lawmakers to implement laws protecting creators.  Overall AI has the potential to revolutionize how the world works, but if these large problems are not fixed then AI will destroy how we, as a society, function. 